
Forbid GIF images !


Does "Hosted" have a connotation of "primary storage" built into it?  Consider finding a different word or phrase to replace hosted which really means "ingestable".


Policy on Acceptable Formats for iDigBio-hosted Images and Other Media

iDigBio’s mission requires that it be able to aggregate and distribute digital media related to 
biological specimens, records, and other objects associated with specimens (e.g., labels and notes) generated by TCNs and other bio- and paleo-collections hosting institutions. This document provides current iDigBio policy as well as recommendations for acquiring, processing, archiving, and distributing still, two-dimensional digital images and other media. We recognize the importance of other image types, including three-dimensional images, and will expand this current policy through time as demand dictates.

The current policy is as follows:

* Compression: All media submitted must be internally compressed, and that compression should attempt to maximize compression without sacrificing image quality.

* Unacceptable image formats: DNG, RAW, PSD, TIFF, and proprietary formats that are not readable with widely available free or open-source software.

* Recommended image formats: The following formats are recommended: JPEG/JPEG2000 with fully preserved Metadata (EXIF and others). We prefer images generated with lossless compression at the camera’s native resolution, or very high quality lossy compression if the workflow doesn’t permit lossless (see recommendations below).  There may be other formats that iDigBio will accept besides the types mentioned above.

* Primary storage: iDigBio accepts images for the purpose of aggregation, discovery, and display in the iDigBio portal and retrieved via the iDigBio API. iDigBio is not currently funded by NSF to be primary storage for specimen images. iDigBio is not a file server for collection media.

* Archival storage: iDigBio accepts images for the purpose of aggregation, discovery, and display in the iDigBio portal and retrieved via the iDigBio API. Archival storage includes the propertyof long-term media preservation. iDigBio is not currently funded by NSF to provide archival storage. iDigBio is not a data backup system for collection media.



MIME Types in the IANA registry (http://www.iana.org).



Media Type       Recommended dcterms:format      Notes

image     image/jpeg

document

audio

video

3d-image






Image Derivative Recommendations
JPEG and JPEG 2000 images should be saved at their native dimensions (spatial resolution).
Manually increasing resolution (e.g., alterations to image size or ppi or dpi settings) beyond that recorded by the camera may insert derived data or unwanted visual artifacts into an image file and is not recommended.
EXIF, IPTC, and other image metadata (including JPEG 2000 XML data), including that added at time of processing, should be preserved in perpetuity and distributed with all derivative and distributed copies of images.
Image processing should be carried out only on DNG or other RAW files to prevent accumulated data losses and potential image degradation by repeated processing of JPEG and TIFF image files.
Excessive image manipulation or compositing, including sharpening, enhancing color saturation or balance, and adjusting contrast should be avoided. 

Image Distribution Recommendations
Images uploaded to aggregators and portals should be ‘fit for display’.
Lower quality images should be distributed to aggregators and portals only when there is no higher quality image available.
When a low quality image is uploaded or distributed, the metadata for that image should indicate that it is the only image available for that specimen. (is this really necessary??)
JPEG format at native resolution and minimal compression is preferred for distribution via the internet.
Lossless compression is preferred.
When lossless compression is not an option, lossy compression at the lowest level is preferred.


“Fit for Display” - This is a technical term that relates to file types and other inline text, encoding or attachments, that are not HTML and that are supported natively, or with helper applications, by web browsers. For instance, most browsers have native support for PDF, JPG, and GIF. This allows a browser to render the content of these files types for a user to view.  All other types of web page content, like MP3, require a helper, either built-in or installed. In the preferences for a browser there are list of media types (or MIME types) paired with applications for ‘helping’ the browser display the content of that file reference. A helper application, sometimes called a plug-in, is software that knows how to render/display the content. Recall that HTML is the native language for web browsers.  Other media types, like TIFF, that require an application other than the browser or plug-in to view their content, fall outside the definition of “Fit for Display”.



