iDigBio Media File Format Requirements and Recommendations

iDigBio’s mission requires that it be able to aggregate and distribute digital media of biological specimens, records, and other objects associated with specimens (e.g., labels and notes) generated by TCNs and other bio- and paleo-collections hosting institutions. This document provides current iDigBio policy and guidelines for distributing digitial media such as images, audio, 3D models, and other types of media.

Below are common media types, their extensions, MIME types, unacceptable formats, and sample values for providing media metadata via Audubon Core (AC).


Images
	Acceptable formats: JPEG, JPEG 2000
	Common file extensions: .jpg, .jpeg, .jp2
	Common MIME types: To Be Determined
	Known Unacceptable formats: DNG, RAW, PSD, TIFF, GIF
	Audubon Core Sample Values:
	    "dc:type" : "StillImage"
            "dc:format" : "image/jpeg"

Video Recordings, Movies
      Acceptable formats: MP4
      Common file extensions: .mp4
      Common MIME types: video/mp4
      Known Unacceptable formats: GIF
      Audubon Core Sample Values:
          "dc:type" : "MovingImage"
	  "dc:format" : "video/mp4"

Audio Recordings
      Acceptable formats: MP3
      Common file extensions: .mp3
      Common MIME types: audio/x-mpeg
      Known Unacceptable formats: WAV
      Audubon Core Sample Values:
          "dc:type" : "Sound"
	  "dc:format" : "audio/x-mpeg"

3D Images / Models
      Acceptable formats: StereoLithograph (STL, binary), Polygon File Format (PLY, binary)
      Common file extensions: STL, PLY
      Common MIME types: model/mesh
      Known Unacceptable formats: To Be Determined
      Audubon Core Sample Values:
            "dc:type" : "InteractiveResource"
	    "dc:format" : "model/mesh"

Documents
	Acceptable formats: Portable Document Format (PDF)
	Common file extensions: PDF
     	Common MIME types: "application/pdf"
     	Known Unacceptable formats: DOC, DOCX
     	Audubon Core Sample Values:
            "dc:type" : "Text"
	    "dc:format" : "application/pdf"


The current policy is as follows:

* Compression: All media submitted must be internally compressed, and that compression should attempt to maximize compression without sacrificing media quality. For most media types, a lossy compression algorithm would be employed to achieve this balance. For 3D models, reducing the object complexity or number of polygons (by smoothing or optimizing mesh quality) can help achieve the same goal.

* Unacceptable media formats: Proprietary or formats that are not readable with widely available free or open-source software and libraries. This includes but is not limited to: DNG, RAW, PSD, TIFF, FLAC, GIF, FLV, H.264, AutoCAD, SolidWorks, Microsoft DOCX.


Lossless?
* Recommended image formats: The following formats are recommended: JPEG/JPEG2000 with fully preserved Metadata (EXIF and others). We prefer images generated with lossless compression at the camera’s native resolution, or very high quality lossy compression if the workflow doesn’t permit lossless (see recommendations below).  There may be other formats that iDigBio will accept besides the types mentioned above.

* Primary storage: iDigBio accepts images for the purpose of aggregation, discovery, and display in the iDigBio portal and retrieved via the iDigBio API. iDigBio is not currently funded by NSF to be primary storage for specimen images. iDigBio is not a file server for collection media.

* Archival storage: iDigBio accepts images for the purpose of aggregation, discovery, and display in the iDigBio portal and retrieved via the iDigBio API. Archival storage includes the propertyof long-term media preservation. iDigBio is not currently funded by NSF to provide archival storage. iDigBio is not a data backup system for collection media.




original copy below this line....
=============================================

Unacceptable formats: DNG, RAW, PSD, TIFF, and proprietary formats that are not readable with widely available free or open-source software.
Recommended formats: While iDigBio will accept all formats that are not listed above as unacceptable, the following formats are recommended: JPEG/JPEG2000 with fully preserved Metadata (EXIF and others). We prefer images generated with lossless compression at the camera’s native resolution, or very high quality lossy compression if the workflow doesn’t permit lossless. (see recommendations below)
Archival storage: iDigBio sees the importance of archival storage although currently does not provide any, and hosting of images in iDigBio should not be seen as such. As the current iDigBio NSF agreement does not fund archival storage, within current resource limitations, iDigBio may be able to facilitate storage of images on a case-by-case basis.

Recommendations for the Acquisition, Processing, Storage, and Distribution of Digital Media

iDigBio is pleased to offer the following recommendations for capturing, processing, archiving, and distributing digital images based on work of the Developing Robust Object-to-Image-to-Data Workflows Working Group (DROID), a review of industry standards*, input from the broader collections community, and feedback from iDigBio staff. These recommendations are divided into four clusters: image acquisition, image archiving, image derivatives, and image distribution. 
iDigBio accepts these media types, with accompanying Audubon Core metadata:
Media Type
File Extension
Notes
image
jpg
best quality, not a thumbnail, via a URL visible to public
image
jpg2
also called jpg 2000
image
gif

image
png

image
svg
vector graphics
document
pdf

audio
mp3

audio
ogg

video
flv

video
mpeg

video
swf


Image Acquisition Recommendations 
Camera RAW is the preferred format for recording camera images.
Scanner images should be recorded in 24 bit or higher at 300-600 ppi in TIFF format.
Record at the highest native resolution available for the imaging device.
Adjust white balance settings to match the light source.
A visible color checker and scale are recommended, as appropriate.
Adobe RGB or sRGB are the preferred color spaces and should be stated in the metadata.
CMYK color space should be avoided.
Image file names should be restricted to alpha numeric characters, without spaces or other special characters, underscore (_) and hyphen (–) excepted.

Image Archiving Recommendations
Archiving images is strongly recommended and is viewed as an institutional responsibility, governed by institutional policy.
Archived image files should be permanently retained in a secure, redundant environment on institutional infrastructure or commercial back-up services.
Uncompressed DNG is the preferred archival format.
Images captured in proprietary camera RAW format (e.g., CR2, NEF, PEF, etc.) should be converted to Digital Negative format (DNG).
Conversion to DNG can be accomplished via Adobe DNG Converter, available free from Adobe.com, or via Adobe Photoshop or Adobe Photoshop Lightroom.
Uncompressed or lossless compressed, unmodified TIFF at 24 bits or higher is an alternative archival format.

Image Derivative Recommendations
JPEG and JPEG 2000 images should be saved at their native dimensions (spatial resolution).
Manually increasing resolution (e.g., alterations to image size or ppi or dpi settings) beyond that recorded by the camera may insert derived data or unwanted visual artifacts into an image file and is not recommended.
EXIF, IPTC, and other image metadata (including JPEG 2000 XML data), including that added at time of processing, should be preserved in perpetuity and distributed with all derivative and distributed copies of images.
Image processing should be carried out only on DNG or other RAW files to prevent accumulated data losses and potential image degradation by repeated processing of JPEG and TIFF image files.
Excessive image manipulation or compositing, including sharpening, enhancing color saturation or balance, and adjusting contrast should be avoided. 

Image Distribution Recommendations
Images uploaded to aggregators and portals should be ‘fit for display’.
Lower quality images should be distributed to aggregators and portals only when there is no higher quality image available.
When a low quality image is uploaded or distributed, the metadata for that image should indicate that it is the only image available for that specimen. (is this really necessary??)
JPEG format at native resolution and minimal compression is preferred for distribution via the internet.
Lossless compression is preferred.
When lossless compression is not an option, lossy compression at the lowest level is preferred.


“Fit for Display” - This is a technical term that relates to file types and other inline text, encoding or attachments, that are not HTML and that are supported natively, or with helper applications, by web browsers. For instance, most browsers have native support for PDF, JPG, and GIF. This allows a browser to render the content of these files types for a user to view.  All other types of web page content, like MP3, require a helper, either built-in or installed. In the preferences for a browser there are list of media types (or MIME types) paired with applications for ‘helping’ the browser display the content of that file reference. A helper application, sometimes called a plug-in, is software that knows how to render/display the content. Recall that HTML is the native language for web browsers.  Other media types, like TIFF, that require an application other than the browser or plug-in to view their content, fall outside the definition of “Fit for Display”.


Other Acceptable Media Formats
The other media types that are on the acceptable list are displayed with their corresponding thumbnail icon.
*Industry References
Universal Photographic Digital Imaging Guidelines
The AIC Guide to Digital Photography and Conservation Documentation
American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works
OpenRAW.org
Adobe Digital Negative (DNG) Specification
DNG  http://www.dpbestflow.org/DNG
Audubon Core http://terms.tdwg.org/wiki/Audubon_Core_Term_List
MIME Types in the IANA registry (http://www.iana.org).
